# Something In, Something Out

Okay, so I have no idea why I am writing this or if it will continue but whatever.

I was kind of bored so I'd went to lay down in bed just sort of laying in the dark thinking about things. Like usual I
ended up thinking about stuff I could potentially do to make some money and that led me to think about games. Now, I'm
not really great at making stuff or following through on things and I've been watching a Pokemon Let's Play so I was
going down that kind of angle. RPG, Open Map, Menu combat system. Then I started thinking what if you simplify it even
more as a thought exercise. This led me to like Event based systems and the 'what is a game'? Question which leads to the
A happens -> B follows. Input -> Output, Something In -> Something Out.

Anyway, brain goes fucking nuts now thinking about event driven stuff and I thought it might be a fun little exercise
so... let's see what happens.

## Main Game Loop

So I've played around with the Playdate SDK and Lua a small amount and since I have a skeleton repo for a Lua project 
I thought it might be a fun place to start. So main.lua

```
import "CoreLibs/object"
import "CoreLibs/graphics"
import "CoreLibs/sprites"
import "CoreLibs/timer"

local pd <const> = playdate;

function playdate.update()
   --- Main Game Loop
end

```

This is the super basics of any game. At the beginning it's just a loop. Anything inside the loop is executed, the loop
repeats indefinitely until the game terminates. From the humble start menu, to the AAA games of today it all just starts
with a loop.

(Honestly, one of the worse things about modern dev is you get the idea to do something. Then start the repo, start the
IDE, wait ten minutes, consider how nice bed was...)

So, in this loop normally we might listen for some input. If I recall correctly the PlayDate has 7 buttons (not including
the crank) up, down, left, right, a, and b. These are our inputs. The premise would be we use one of these buttons and
we expect something to happen in response.

Let's just quickly do something like this:

```
function playdate.update()
   --- Main Game Loop

   if (pd.buttonIsPressed(pd.kButtonDown)) then
      print("Down Is Pressed")
   end

end
```

This is fairly straightforward: in the loop we check to see if the down button is pressed if it is we print the line
'Down Is Pressed' to the console. This works fine. We could model this for further buttons like so:

```
function playdate.update()
   --- Main Game Loop

   if (pd.buttonIsPressed(pd.kButtonDown)) then
      print("Down Is Pressed")
   end

   if (pd.buttonIsPressed(pd.kButtonUp)) then
      print("Up is pressed")
   end

end
```

Eventually we'd end up with a main loop that comprised all the buttons and the various behaviours that might act upon
them. Of course we'd need all the actions that could potentially occur within this represented somehow. Obviously if you
had everything just sitting in this one loop it would become rather cumbersome to deal with and this leads to various
abstractions and programming paradigms that allow us to deal with this more effectively.

This brings me to the why I had to start a repo and start writing. I kind of want to just play around with this. Using 
an event driven paradigm.

So let's start by adding all the potential inputs into our game loop.

```
function playdate.update()
   --- Main Game Loop

   if (pd.buttonIsPressed(pd.kButtonDown)) then
      print("Down Is Pressed")
   else
   end

   if (pd.buttonIsPressed(pd.kButtonUp)) then
      print("Up is pressed")
   else
   end

   if (pd.buttonIsPressed(pd.kButtonLeft)) then
      print("Left is pressed")
   else
   end

   if (pd.buttonIsPressed(pd.kButtonRight)) then
      print("Right is pressed")
   else
   end

   if (pd.buttonIsPressed(pd.kButtonA)) then
      print("A Button is Pressed")
   else
   end

   if (pd.buttonIsPressed(pd.kButtonB)) then
      print("B Button is Pressed")
   else
   end

end
```

We now have all the buttons and their states modelled for our input. This is the foundation and were we get to the event
driven part of it. For this we need an event. Let's create it as an object.

```
class("Event").extends();

function Event:init(name)
    self.name = name;
end
```

This isn't super sophisticated as for now we are just getting started. Okay, next we want to create an event emitter. The
idea will be that this will create events for us and then inform any listeners that are attached that the event has been
passed.

```lua
class("EventEmitter").extends()

function EventEmitter:init()
    self.listeners = {}
end

function EventEmitter:emitEvent(eventName)
    local event <const> = Event(eventName)

    for i, listener in pairs(self.listeners) do
        listener:onEvent(event)
    end
end

function EventEmitter:addListener(listener)
    table.insert(self.listeners, listener)
end
```

After this we need to create our listener. This will be a simple object (not sure if interfaces are a thing?) that can 
be extended upon. The idea is that these objects will listen for events that are passed to it and execute an action
upon that request. Let's create one.

```lua
class("Listener").extends()

function Listener:init() end

function Listener:onEvent(event)
    print("Event", event.name)
end
```

We now have everything we need so let's put it altogether with a simple example that just involves the up button.

```lua 
local pd <const> = playdate;
local inputEmitter = EventEmitter();
inputEmitter:addListener(Listener())

function playdate.update()
    --- Main Game Loop
    if (pd.buttonIsPressed(pd.kButtonUp)) then
        inputEmitter:emitEvent("kButtonUpIn")
    else
        inputEmitter:emitEvent("kButtonUpOut")
    end
end

```

This now puts us in a similar position to what we initially had in our game loop. When the up button is pressed we can
print out a line telling us this is the case and when it is not pressed a line is printed out telling us. This will 
execute every time the game loops.

## Input Controller.

Let's try and make this a bit more useful as currently this is just the same as what we had before but more abstracted. 
So at the moment we can only tell if the buttons are pressed or raised, we can add some more states to this fairly
easily. So let's start creating an Input Controller

```lua
class('InputController').extends('Listener')

function InputController:init(name, inputButtonName, eventEmitter)

    self.eventEmitter = eventEmitter
    self.isPressed = false
    self.name = name
    self.inputButtonName = inputButtonName

end

function InputController:onButtonDown()
    if (self.isPressed) then
        return;
    end

    self.isPressed = true
    self.eventEmitter:emitEvent(self.name .. "Press")
end

function InputController:onButtonUp()
    if (not self.isPressed) then
        return;
    end

    self.isPressed = false
    self.eventEmitter:emitEvent(self.name .. "Release")
    self.eventEmitter:emitEvent(self.name .. "Click")
end

function InputController:addListener(listener)
    self.eventEmitter:addListener(listener)
end

function InputController:onEvent(event)
    if (event.name == (self.inputButtonName .. "In")) then
        self:onButtonDown()
    end

    if (event.name == (self.inputButtonName .. "Out")) then
        self:onButtonUp();
    end
end
```

Okay, so what have we done here. We've created a controller class which extends the listener class, currently the listener
class is just for show more than anything. This takes a couple of different parameters a name, what this input is called,
an inputButtonName, this is which input button it should be listening for, and a event emitter.

The controller overrides the onEvent function of our listener class and checks to see if any of the events it cares about
have been fired, if not it does nothing, if it has it runs one of two functions

onButtonDown fires if the input if pressed, the controller has a property called isPressed, checking this property it will
either disregard the result if it is already pressed or, it will set the property to true and fire an event the name
concatenated with the "Press". I'm currently using a so this will be aPress.

The second function does a similar thing but the other way around. However this will also fire an event called "aClick".
We have now transformed our original events from just isUp, isDown to something more useful. We could even extend this 
later for more stuff. Like longClick or rapidClicks. Which is kind of neat.

To utilise this we just need to modify the main game loop a bit

```lua
local aInputController = InputController("a", "kButtonA", controllerEmitter)
aInputController.eventEmitter:addListener(inputListener)
inputEmitter:addListener(aInputController)
```

We now have a controller for the kButtonA input called a that will trigger our functionality.